\input texinfo
@setfilename bsp.info
@tex
% NOTE LOCAL KLUGE TO AVOID TOO MUCH WHITESPACE
\global\long\def\example{%
\begingroup
\let\aboveenvbreak=\par
\let\afterenvbreak=\par
\parskip=0pt
\lisp}
\global\long\def\Eexample{%
\Elisp
\endgroup
\vskip -\parskip% to cancel out effect of following \par
}
@end tex

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Cygnus BSP: (bsp).	The Cygnus Board Support Package
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the Cygnus board support
package.

Copyright 1999 Cygnus Solutions.
Written by Mark Salter.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy or distribute modified versions of this
manual under the terms of the GPL (for which purpose this text may be
regarded as a program in the language TeX).
@end ifinfo

@setchapternewpage off
@setchapternewpage odd
@settitle Cygnus BSP Manual

@titlepage
@title{Cygnus BSP Manual}
@subtitle{A user's guide to the Cygnus Board Support Package}
@author Mark Salter
@author Cygnus Solutions
@page
@tex
\def\$#1${{#1}}  % Kluge: collect RCS revision info without $...$
\xdef\manvers{\$Revision: 1.10 $}  % For use in headers, footers too
{\parskip=0pt
\hfill Cygnus Solutions\par
\hfill \manvers\par
\hfill \TeX{}info \texinfoversion\par
}
\global\parindent=0pt
@end tex

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Cygnus Solutions

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, , (dir)
@top Scope of this Document

This document describes the Cygnus Board Support Package.

@menu
* Overview::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

The overall BSP support is divided into common code, architecture specific
code and board specific code. This structure is represented in the BSP
directory hierarchy.

@tex
% I think something like @colophon should be in texinfo.  In the
% meantime:
\long\def\colophon{\hbox to0pt{}\vfill
\centerline{The body of this manual is set in}
\centerline{\fontname\tenrm,}
\centerline{with headings in {\bf\fontname\tenbf}}
\centerline{and examples in {\tt\fontname\tentt}.}
\centerline{{\it\fontname\tenit\/},}
\centerline{{\bf\fontname\tenbf}, and}
\centerline{{\sl\fontname\tensl\/}}
\centerline{are used for emphasis.}\vfill}
\page\colophon
@end tex

@contents
@bye
